---
title: 'Reading list March 2020'
date: 2020-03-31
permalink: /posts/2020/03/RL1/
tags:
  - ReadingList
---

This series is meant to share some reading material that I enjoyed; publications, Twitter threads, blogposts, news articles, etc. are all fair game. I will clearly indicate which are scientific or non-scientific, if necessary.

1. Whittaker et al. (2020): Calibration of ionic and cellular cardiac electrophysiology models

https://doi.org/10.1002/wsbm.1482 

A very in-depth review (40+ pages!) of modelling paradigms in cardiac electrophysiology. As a novice modeller, I found many of the ideas very enlightening. The review is very approachable for experimentalists because the text is written very clearly, isn't overly laden with equations, and clearly defines technical expressions. 

2. Moser & Moser (2020): Per Andersen (1930–2020)

doi: 10.1038/d41586-020-00836-5

A great account of an inspiring scientist. I've only done whole-cell recordings in transfected cell lines so far, but have read work from the days before the HCN channels were cloned (e.g. Dario DiFrancesco, Nobuhisa Hagiwara, Hiroshi Irisawa, etc., mainly between 60s and 80s.), so I can somewhat understand the value and challenge of Dr. Andersen's early work adapting recording methods to study the brain. In particular, brain slices! You hear about brain slice recordings all the time now - they must be a staple to the neuroscience toolbox. 

3. Hernandez et al. (2020): The Korean Clusters

https://graphics.reuters.com/CHINA-HEALTH-SOUTHKOREA-CLUSTERS/0100B5G33SB/index.html

I wonder if these posts will be viewed in the future. If so, I can't help but wonder how society will change from the pandemic we're currently going through. This post is only one of many, I'm sure, to describe how Covid19 spread(s). Self-isolation! 
