---
title: 'Reading List June 2020'
date: 2020-06-20
permalink: /posts/2020/06/20/
tags:
  - Reading
---

A light novel, manga, and a textbook of electrochemistry. 

1. [Tsuki ga michibiku isekai douchuu (Moon-led journey to another world)](https://isekailunatic.com/)
This is a pleasant and nostalgic read for me, since it was among the first light novels I read. The story begins with the transport of high school student Makoto Misumi to another world as part of a pact between his parents, who were originally denizens of the other world, and the Goddess who ruled that world. Tsukuyomi (a prominent god in Japanese mythology) mediates Makoto's transfer, and is empathetic about the absurd situation. Unfortunately, the other world's Goddess, who values physical beauty above all else, judges Makoto's looks to be unworthy of her blessings, and promptly disposes of him by sending him to the barren, uninhabited wastelands of her world. To prevent Makoto from 'defiling' the beauty of the humans in her world, the Goddess withholds granting Makoto knowledge of the human's language, but in return, blesses him with the ability to speak to all non-human species. Eventually, Makoto becomes incredibly overpowered (as is normal for such series), so there is a certain entertainment factor from that, but there are also several creative world-building and character settings in this story that make it an enjoyable read. 

2. [Witch Hat Atelier](https://mangarawr.com/manga/witch-hat-atelier/)
A beautiful manga set in a world akin to Medieval Europe with fantasy and magic. The art reminds me of Yakusoku no Neverland (The Promised Neverland), but also slightly of Berserk. Although the main cast are primarily young girls, the visuals evokes a feeling of grace and serenity, but also contains macabre undertones. The main character, Coco, is the young daughter of a tailor/seamstress of a small, remote village. Years before the story begins, Coco and her mother visited a festival where she was handed a grimoire and pen by a roadside stranger wearing an unusual mask, who suggested that these tools would allow Coco to become a witch. Tragedy arises when Coco mistakenly invokes one of the magic spells inscribed in the grimoire, fossilizing her house and mother. Luckily, Coco alone is rescued in the nick of time by a travelling witch, who, for various reasons, ends up taking Coco in as one of his apprentices. The series explores the grotesque and macabre through a deeply-rooted conflict between opposing factions of the witch community, but also presents numerous heartwarming moments as Coco breaks into her surroundings and becomes a full-fledged witch. Overall, the tone, themes, and visuals of this series remind me of Little Witch Academia and Ran to Haiiro no Sekai (Ran and the Gray World), both of which were absolutely superb. I highly recommend this and the other series mentioned above.

3. [Electrochemical Methods by Bard & Faulkner](https://www.wiley.com/en-ca/Electrochemical+Methods:+Fundamentals+and+Applications,+2nd+Edition-p-9780471043720)
I'm not a chemist by any means, but because I am interested in electrophysiology, all things 'electro-' catch my eye - though I must admit, I understand very few of such things. Consequently, there are a lot of topics covered in this text that are beyond me. However, chapter 2 of this text, which talks about thermodynamics, is particularly interesting, as it presents a very clear description of how *reversibility* carries multiple definitions in this field. Another relevant concept that is discussed in this chapter is that of liquid junction potentials and, in general, how electrochemical interactions form between interfaces. 
